User Tracking
-------------

This version of MailZu-ng-da-ng can track user changes with respect to assigned external email
addreses as they are made in the upstream authentication systems. It adds new combinations of user
and email addresses to the users table and it also marks them for deletion should the combination
be removed from the originating upstream authentication systems. The users table entries have an
extra field for this purpose, namely the field "deleted". To maintain referrential integrity the
code will only actually delete the entry from the users table when the corresponding entries have
deleted from the DA lists.


Mail Address Priorities
-----------------------

Mail address priorities play an important role in Amavis when used in combination with SQL DA
Lists. There are two places where Mail Addresses appear in a SQL context, namely:

1)  In the "mailaddr" table. This table stores "Email Sender" addresses, together with a priority.

2)  In the "users" table. This table stores the reachable recipient addresses, together with the
    login name, a full name, a priority and a policy.

In both cases the priority is determined on basis of the email address stored in the table
entry, using the following rules:

      /* Priority blocks
        * - user+foo@sub.example.com     full email match (default match);                  4100
        * - user@sub.example.com         full email match (default match);                  4000
        * - user+foo@                    local part match;                                  3100
        * - user@                        local part match;                                  3000
        * - sub.example.com              exact domain match;                                2000 + #domain-components
        * - .sub.example.com             domain and all sub-domain matches (default match); 1000 + #domain-components
        * - .example.com                 domain and all sub-domain matches (default match); 1000 + #domain-components
        * - .com                         domain and all sub-domain matches (default match); 1000 + #domain-components
        * - .                            all domain matches (default match);                1000
        */

The priority in the mailaddr table is used during DA list matching of Sender addresses. The priority
ensures that the match results are presented in a certain, repeatable order. For instance:

    When matching on "bloggs.com" and "joe@bloggs.com", because both are defined in the DA list
    for a recipient user, the "joe@bloggs.com" address will be presented before the "bloggs.com"
    address as it has a higher priority. Therefore the more specific address will determine the
    outcome of the DA list match. This allows for the complete denial of domains while allowing
    specific addresses.

The priority in the users table is used to select the policy when matching a recipient address. If
more than one users table entry matches the recipient address, the users table with the highest
priority is used to determine the applicable policy.

The priority in the users table may be used in addition to deal with the the external recipient
address being received/managed by more than one internal mail user (cf. duplicate email addresses,
DA_README).

Finally, if a user manages more than one recipient email address, the priority may be used by
MailZu or the scripts to select the appropriate "From Address" when emailing the administrator,
or "Destination Address" when sending a quarantine report.
